# Metadata localization {#metadata_fields_localization}

Before GeoNode 5, the labels for metadata editor have been statically localized using `gettext()` and i18n `.po` files.

Since the jsonschema is much more dynamic in its behaviour, allowing custom schema, other ways for localizing the schema fields labels were needed.

The proposed/implemented idea is to use a codelist, implemented as a thesaurus with a well known identifier `labels_i18n` where:

-   

    `Thesaurus`:

    :   -   `identifier` = \"[labels_i18n]{.title-ref}\" (fixed)
        -   `date` = latest update

-   

    `ThesaurusKeyword`:

    :   -   `about` = explicit \"title\" annotation, otherwise field name
        -   `alt_label` = Default label

-   

    `ThesaurusKeywordLabel`:

    :   -   localized label

In order to avoid clashes, the schema fields keys should be prefixed with the metadata handler id (\"`inspire_`\", \"`myproject_`\", \...)

The implementation will look for translations in the thesaurus, and then will the gettext as fallback.

## Procedure

JSON schema provides the annotations `title` and `description` to document the purpose of a field.

The metadata editor will show the \"title\" as the label for the field and the \"description\", if present, as a tooltip.
If the `title` field does not exist in the schema, the editor will usually show the field name as the label.

The SparseHandler will look for the `title` and `description` annotation in the subschema, and will try to localize them, using the content as the key for the localization procedures.

So, if `title` is defined with the content `title_key`, the procedures will look, in order, for:

-   a ThesaurusKeyword with about = `title_key__ovr`
-   a ThesaurusKeyword with about = `title_key`
-   a `getText` entry with key `title_key`

and the first returned result is usaed as a replacemente for the \"title\" annotation. The [getText]{.title-ref} value is used as a fallback anyway, since it returns the searched key if no entry is found.

::: note
::: title
Note
:::

The `getText` is used as a fallback for base fields for which localization was already provided. In this way the core GeoNode installation does not require the `labels_i18n` thesaurus, allowing for a smooth transition toward the new localization procedure.
:::

::: note
::: title
Note
:::

The `__ovr` mechanism has been added as a way to customize locally standard fields\' labels, avoiding conflicts when official thesauri content are changed

Please note that the thesauri can be partially dumped or imported, in order to ease the handling of customized labels.
:::

Even if the `title` annotation is not present in the subschema, the GeoNode metadata engine will search for a localized string having key equal to the property name. If found, the `title` annotation will be automatically added.

Similar to the above procedure, these keys are searched for:

-   a ThesaurusKeyword with about = `<fieldname>__ovr`
-   a ThesaurusKeyword with about = `<fieldname>`

If anything is found, the `title` annotation will be automatically added with the found content.

In the same way, if the `description` annotation is not declared, the key `<fieldname>__descr` will be searched, and, if found, `description` will be added.
